Angora Goats: Production and Management

Christopher John Lupton
Texas A&M University, San Angelo, Texas, U.S.A.

INTRODUCTION

Dogs, goats, and sheep were the first animals to be domesticated by man. Domestication of the goat is considered to have occurred at least 10000 years ago in the Near East and Africa. The animals were used for production of meat, milk, skins, and fiber. Fiberproducing goats have occupied the area between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Ocean for at least 2000 years. The white, lustrous-fleeced goat called the Angora (Capra hircus aegagrus) was developed on the Turkish plains close to Ankara, from which the name of the goat was derived. The original Turkish Angora goats were described as small, refined, and delicate and annually produced 1 2 kg of mohair in ringlets 20 25 cm in length. The primary and secondary follicles of Angora goats produce fibers of similar diameter and length, giving rise to a nonshedding single-coated fleece that is quite distinct from cashmere and the fleece of other goats that produce double coats. The first recorded shipment of Angora goats out of Turkey occurred in 1554. Shipments to South Africa (1838), the United States (1849), Australia (1850s), and the United Kingdom (1881) followed. Mohair production flourished in South Africa and the United States. By 1909, 1.34 million Angora goats were shorn in Texas. The population increased to 4.61 million by 1965 but subsequently declined to the present-day 220000. In recent years, the South African Angora goat population peaked in 1989 with 3.0 million animals. By 2003, this number had declined to 1.1 million. Meanwhile, the population in Turkey had declined to about 100000 Angora goats.

NUTRITION

Most Angora goats are maintained on native rangelands that are diverse in grasses, forbs, and shrubs. To support their high rate of fiber production, Angora goats are highly selective browsers, choosing the most nutritious plants or plant parts when available. Maintaining an Angora goat on monocultures such as Bermuda grass can cause nutrition-related problems. Similarly, holding the animals on depleted rangeland without adequate supplementation can also result in many problems. An Angora doe will continue to produce fiber at close to an optimal level even when nutrition is inadequate. At such times, fiber production takes priority over maintenance of body weight or continuation of pregnancy. However, poor nutrition eventually results in production of short (but finer), matted mohair, lower fleece weights, lower reproduction rates, and abortion. An authoritative bulletin contains energy, protein, mineral, and vitamin requirements of Angora goats for a wide range of body weights, different levels of activity, fiber production, growth, and milk production, and different stages of pregnancy. For year-round grazing on Texas rangeland, light, medium, and heavy stocking rates are considered to be one goat per 6.6, 3.3, and 2.2 acres, respectively. Supplementation of Angora goats (e.g., for development of kids, flushing of does, or inadequate forage on the range) and related economics are the subjects of many texts and computer programs.
Adequate nutrition is important after shearing, which decreases insulation and results in increased energy demand, especially in cold, wet, or windy weather. Providing freshly shorn goats with ample feed before returning them to the range can help avoid catastrophic postshear death losses.

REPRODUCTION

Angora goats have a reputation for low reproduction rates. This causes problems for the producer in terms of lost income from sale of excess animals, making progress in herd improvement, and maintaining herd numbers. There are various reasons for low reproductive efficiency. The most important is inadequate nutrition at one or more stages of growth or during the reproductive cycle. Many reproductive problems can be cured with adequate nutrition and/or increased management inputs that must be considered in light of anticipated economic returns.
The reproductive processes of Angora goats are similar to those of other goats. Major exceptions are the pronounced seasonality of mating in Angoras and problems associated with the high and competing demands of fiber production. Most Angora goats will attain puberty and breed at 18 months of age. Well-fed, well-developed kids occasionally breed at 6 8 months of age. Both males and females are seasonal breeders, the female having recurring estrual periods during fall/winter if not bred. Estrous cycles last from 19 to 21 days, with estrus itself lasting about one day. Gestation length is 149 days (range 143 153 days). The body weight and development of the doe are major sources of variation in ovulation and kidding rates, the ovulation rate decreasing with lower body weights.
Normal birth weight of kids ranges from 2 to 3 kg. Larger kids cause birthing difficulties for their dams, whereas smaller kids have low survival rates. A normal kid crop for commercial herds is in the range of 40 to 80%. Kid crops of 150% (i.e., 50% of does raised twins) have been reported in well-managed, small flocks. Lowkid crops can be a result of failure to ovulate or conceive, loss of embryo (resorption or abortion), or death of kid after birth. Most of these problems can be affected in a positive manner by improving nutrition and increasing the level of management. An example of the former would include a period of supplemental feeding before and during breeding. Examples of the latter would include kidding in small pastures or through a barn instead of on the range. Again, cost-effectiveness of all extra inputs is a major consideration for producers.

GENETICS AND SELECTION

Because the majority of income from Angora goats traditionally has come from fiber, much of the selection pressure has been for increased fiber production. Recently, more interest has been focused on selecting for a dual-purpose Angora goat. Hence, more emphasis has been placed on body traits such as gain and mature weight. In its current form, the Angora goat produces fiber more efficiently than any other animal to which it has been compared. Selection for fine fiber (i.e., more valuable fiber) and against medullated (hollow) fibers has been practiced also. Most of the commonly measured and economically important production traits are inherited in a quantitative manner (i.e., under control of many genes). Derivation of comprehensive indices to assist with selection programs (though beyond the scope of this article) requires knowledge of the economic value, variability, and heritability of each trait, and the relationships among traits.
Because economic values change over time, average values calculated over a long period of time are most useful (unless there is a clear indication or guarantee of future value). Shelton reported "consensus values" for heritability of the various traits. Highly heritable values include lock length; clean yield; mature weight; face, neck, and belly covering; secondary/primary follicle ratio; and scrotal division. Moderately heritable (0.15 0.25) values include fleece weight, fleece density, average fiber diameter, kemp (medullation) content, and weaning weight, and lowly heritable values include reproductive rate, longevity, and adaptability. Because Angora goat breeders are interested in many animal and fleece traits, developing a comprehensive selection index for Angora goats is a difficult task. To further complicate the issue, few of the traits are completely independent, and all are affected to some degree by such factors as age, nutrition, year, sex, and type of birth. The index for ranking yearling males on the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station annual central performance test has received wide acceptance in the Texas industry.

HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS

Angora goats are susceptible to a broad range of diseases, consideration of which is beyond the scope of this article. When maintained under semiarid, extensive conditions (similar to those under which they were developed originally in Turkey), they generally thrive so long as adequate nutrition and fresh water are available. Problems tend to arise when animals are concentrated into small areas, particularly when conditions are damp. Diseases (e.g., pinkeye, soremouth, caseous lymphadenitis, pneumonia, bluetongue, dysentery, mastitis, caprine arthritis encephalitis, urinary calculi) and parasites (e.g., roundworms, coccidiosis, lice, scabies, etc.) that tend to be more prevalent in Angora goats, and how the industry deals with these problems, are the subjects of authoritative coverage elsewhere.

CALENDAR OF OPERATIONS

In Texas, Angora does are bred in October to kid in March. Two to three weeks before and after males are introduced (one male to 20 25 does), does may be supplemented nutritionally to enhance ovulation rates. Throughout winter, range and forage conditions are evaluated in conjunction with the body condition of does so that a timely decision on required supplementation can be made. Also, internal parasites are monitored so the goats can be treated with anthelmintics after first frost, when fecal egg counts indicate treatment is warranted. Does are sheared just before kidding, a practice that seems to encourage them to seek out a sheltered place in which to give birth. In range flocks, kids typically remain with their dams until weaning in August, when the kids are sheared for the first time. Replacement selections are made from the 18-month-old does and males at this time, and older animals are inspected for possible culling. A few weeks after shearing, all animals may be treated for external parasites with prescribed pesticides.

CONCLUSION

The present-day Angora goat is an animal breeding success, with its ability to produce more than twice as much fiber compared to 100 years ago. However, the ability to produce more fiber almost certainly has been achieved with a concurrent loss in adaptability. Except in very favorable years, today’s animals must be supplemented at critical times in order to maintain satisfactory levels of kid, meat, and mohair production. Further, the high priority the goat now has to produce fiber appears to have made it more susceptible to nutrition-related health problems, compared to other breeds. The long decline in the world’s Angora goat population is a direct result of the inability of this animal enterprise to provide producers with adequate, consistent income. This in turn is a consequence of changing fashion trends and a general decline in demand for and use of animal fibers in modern textiles, in favor of cheaper synthetics. Although mohair is still one of the most important of the specialty animal fibers, its consumption is not expected to increase dramatically, despite the best efforts of producers promotional groups and federal support programs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is indebted to his colleagues at the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, San Angelo M. Shelton, J. E. Huston, and M. C. Calhoun for their willingness to share their substantial knowledge of Angora goats with this fiber scientist and many others in the goat industry.